Release notes for 9.4.0 (#18973)
elastic/logstash: docs/release-notes/index.md

If growth exceeds that factor, Logstash splits the batch into chunks that are sent individually to the outputs, each with at most `pipeline.batch.size` size.

Use this to reduce out-of-memory risk when filters (for example, a split filter) greatly expand batch size.

Related:
* Add a new config option to split batch into chunks before outputs [#18680](https://github.com/elastic/logstash/pull/18680)

#### Additional features and enhancements [logstash-9.4.0-more-features]

* Introduced histogram flow metrics for batch size and event count. Some percentile values for such metrics are now exposed in the response from `_node/stats` API, on a pipeline basis [#18770](https://github.com/elastic/logstash/pull/18770)

* Enabled the `lifetime` window for pipeline's batch size metrics [#18911](https://github.com/elastic/logstash/pull/18911)

* Exposed the max value for batch's `byte_size`, reported in 1, 5, and 15 minutes time windows [#18850](https://github.com/elastic/logstash/pull/18850)

### Updates to dependencies [logstash-9.4.0-dependencies]

* Update bundled JDK to 21.0.10 build 7

> * Update JRuby to 10.0.5.0

Reviewer: We added TLS_RSA_* removals in [9.3](https://github.com/elastic/logstash/pull/18949/changes#diff-f52ed586224a62ba2c7ca984a47739065981460407c1d5aa20c3f3984d1af159R30-R31) and I think it makes sense to add here as we are pointing JDK 21.0.10 upgrade.

```suggestion
* Update JRuby to 10.0.5.0
* Update bundled JDK to 21.0.10 build 7

::::{important}

As of JDK 21.0.10, all `TLS_RSA_*` cipher suites are deactivated by default due to their lack of forward secrecy. Connections relying on these suites will fail with an `SSLHandshakeException` and must be migrated to ECDHE-based cipher suites.

::::
```

Related:
* Add a new config option to split batch into chunks before outputs [#18680](https://github.com/elastic/logstash/pull/18680)

#### New batch histogram metrics [logstash-9.4.0-new-batch-histogram-metrics]

We've improved visibility of batch sizing at a pipeline level by exposing new histogram-type metrics in the `GET /_node/stats` endpoint. These metrics show the distribution of batch sizes in bytes and event-count for the lifetime of the pipeline, as well as for the most recent 1, 5, and 15-minute time windows.

Related:
* [Implement metrics that exposes batch size and count of contained events](https://github.com/elastic/logstash/issues/17838)
#### Additional features and enhancements [logstash-9.4.0-more-features]

* Performance improvements which saves ~40% CPU resource on DLQ segment file lookup operations [19013](https://github.com/elastic/logstash/pull/19013)

> ### Updates to dependencies [logstash-9.4.0-dependencies]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

### Updates to dependencies [logstash-9.4.0-dependencies]
```

% ### Fixes [logstash-next-fixes]
% *

## 9.4.0 [logstash-9.4.0-release-notes]

### Features and enhancements [logstash-9.4.0-features-enhancements]

#### Reactive pipeline recovery [logstash-9.4.0-reactive-pipeline-recovery]

This release adds opt-in crashed-pipeline recovery with a new `pipeline.recovery` setting. It applies when `config.reload.automatic` is enabled and accepts:

* `auto`: recovers crashed pipelines that are backed by the persistent queue
* `false` (default): do not automate recovery of crashed pipelines
* `true`: recovers all crashed pipelines, even if backed by the ephemeral memory queue (risk: data loss)

Related:
* Support reactive pipeline recovery with `config.reload` manager [#18930](https://github.com/elastic/logstash/pull/18930)

#### Batch chunking  [logstash-9.4.0-batch-chunking]

We’ve added a new setting, `pipeline.batch.output_chunking.growth_threshold_factor`, that limits the factor by which a batch can increase in size after being passed through filters.
If growth exceeds that factor, Logstash splits the batch into chunks that are sent individually to the outputs, each with at most `pipeline.batch.size` size.

> Use this to reduce out-of-memory risk when filters (for example, a split filter) greatly expand batch size.

Reviewer 3: Instead of leading with the _setting_ we are introducing, I'd like to lead with they _reason_ we are adding it:

~~~ suggestion
We have added a safety mechanism to limit memory expansion when using filters that produce more events than they consume (like the `split` filter), controlled by the new `pipeline.batch.output_chunking.growth_threshold_factor` setting. When a batch growth exceeds the configured factor, it is re-chunked into new batches of `pipeline.batch.size` events before being handled by the outputs.
~~~

Related:
* Add a new config option to split batch into chunks before outputs [#18680](https://github.com/elastic/logstash/pull/18680)

> #### Additional features and enhancements [logstash-9.4.0-more-features]
> 
> * Introduced histogram flow metrics for batch size and event count. Some percentile values for such metrics are now exposed in the response from `_node/stats` API, on a pipeline basis [#18770](https://github.com/elastic/logstash/pull/18770)
> 
> * Enabled the `lifetime` window for pipeline's batch size metrics [#18911](https://github.com/elastic/logstash/pull/18911)
> 
> * Exposed the max value for batch's `byte_size`, reported in 1, 5, and 15 minutes time windows [#18850](https://github.com/elastic/logstash/pull/18850)

Reviewer 3: These three are all really the same feature and can get grouped into a single description.

```suggestion
#### New batch histogram metrics [logstash-9.4.0-new-batch-histogram-metrics]

We've improved visibility of batch sizing at a pipeline level by exposing new histogram-type metrics in the `GET /_node/stats` endpoint. These metrics show the distribution of batch sizes in bytes and event-count for the lifetime of the pipeline, as well as for the most recent 1, 5, and 15-minute time windows.

Related:
* [Implement metrics that exposes batch size and count of contained events](https://github.com/elastic/logstash/issues/17838)
```

> 

Reviewer: I have also merged the DLQ improvements PR and after Rye's suggestion, I would like to add the following notes:

```suggestion
#### Additional features and enhancements [logstash-9.4.0-more-features]

* Performance improvements which saves ~40% CPU resource on DLQ segment file lookup operations [19013](https://github.com/elastic/logstash/pull/19013)
```

When a batch growth exceeds the configured factor, it is re-chunked into smaller batches of `pipeline.batch.size` events before being handled by the outputs.

#### New batch histogram metrics [logstash-9.4.0-new-batch-histogram-metrics]

We've improved visibility of batch sizing at a pipeline level by exposing new histogram-type metrics in the `GET /_node/stats` endpoint [#17838](https://github.com/elastic/logstash/issues/17838). 
These metrics show the distribution of batch sizes in bytes and event-count for the lifetime of the pipeline, as well as for the most recent 1, 5, and 15-minute time windows.

#### Additional features and enhancements [logstash-9.4.0-more-features]

* Performance improvements which saves ~40% CPU resource on DLQ segment file lookup operations [19013](https://github.com/elastic/logstash/pull/19013)

### Updates to dependencies [logstash-9.4.0-dependencies]

* Update JRuby to 10.0.5.0
* Update bundled JDK to 21.0.10 build 7

::::{important}

> Logstash 9.4.0 upgrades JRuby to 10 since 9.x is now EOL. JRuby 10 requires Java 21, dropping support for any version below, including 17.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Logstash 9.4.0 upgrades JRuby to 10 because 9.x is now EOL. JRuby 10 requires Java 21, dropping support for any version below, including 17.
```

% ### Fixes [logstash-next-fixes]
% *

## 9.4.0 [logstash-9.4.0-release-notes]

### Features and enhancements [logstash-9.4.0-features-enhancements]

#### Reactive pipeline recovery [logstash-9.4.0-reactive-pipeline-recovery]

> This release adds opt-in crashed-pipeline recovery with a new `pipeline.recovery` setting. It applies when `config.reload.automatic` is enabled and accepts:

Reviewer 4: Trying to avoid the packing/compounded style of writing , and the opt-in part is explained in the list of settings, so I'd suggest:

```suggestion
This release adds a feature to recover from pipeline crashes, under the setting `pipeline.recovery`. It applies when `config.reload.automatic` is enabled and accepts:
```

> * `auto`: recovers crashed pipelines that are backed by the persistent queue

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `auto`: enables pipeline crash recovery for pipelines backed by the persistent queue
```

* `false` (default): do not automate recovery of crashed pipelines

> * `true`: recovers all crashed pipelines, even if backed by the ephemeral memory queue (risk: data loss)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `true`: enables pipeline crash recovery for any pipeline, even if backed by the ephemeral memory queue (risk: data loss)
```

Related:
* Support reactive pipeline recovery with `config.reload` manager [#18930](https://github.com/elastic/logstash/pull/18930)

#### Batch chunking  [logstash-9.4.0-batch-chunking]

> We have added a safety mechanism to limit memory expansion when using filters that produce more events than they consume (like the `split` filter), controlled by the new `pipeline.batch.output_chunking.growth_threshold_factor` setting. When a batch growth exceeds the configured factor, it is re-chunked into new batches of `pipeline.batch.size` events before being handled by the outputs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We have added a safety mechanism to limit memory expansion when using filters that produce more events than they consume (like the `split` filter), controlled by the new `pipeline.batch.output_chunking.growth_threshold_factor` setting. When a batch growth exceeds the configured factor, it is re-chunked into smaller batches of `pipeline.batch.size` events before being handled by the outputs.
```

Related:
* Add a new config option to split batch into chunks before outputs [#18680](https://github.com/elastic/logstash/pull/18680)

#### New batch histogram metrics [logstash-9.4.0-new-batch-histogram-metrics]

We've improved visibility of batch sizing at a pipeline level by exposing new histogram-type metrics in the `GET /_node/stats` endpoint. These metrics show the distribution of batch sizes in bytes and event-count for the lifetime of the pipeline, as well as for the most recent 1, 5, and 15-minute time windows.

Related:

> * [Implement metrics that exposes batch size and count of contained events](https://github.com/elastic/logstash/issues/17838)

Reviewer 5: We used to add the link of PR at the end of the description. Do we really need to have "Related: " and a separated point ? This is new to me.

Reviewer 6: When we highlight new features, we use this structure, where any relevant PRs are added after the main description. Examples: https://www.elastic.co/docs/release-notes/logstash#logstash-9.2.0-batch-size-metrics, https://www.elastic.co/docs/release-notes/logstash#logstash-9.3.0-wait-status

The PR should be a separate link at the end though

#### Additional features and enhancements [logstash-9.4.0-more-features]

* Performance improvements which saves ~40% CPU resource on DLQ segment file lookup operations [19013](https://github.com/elastic/logstash/pull/19013)

### Updates to dependencies [logstash-9.4.0-dependencies]

* Update JRuby to 10.0.5.0
* Update bundled JDK to 21.0.10 build 7

> ::::{important}

Reviewer 6: Let's add this to the breaking changes page, and link back to it here. We should also say something along the lines of "We recommend using the bundled JDK for the best experience running Logstash"

Reviewer 2: Done, made it similar to the "JDK11 not supported"

> Logstash 9.4.0 requires Java 21 or later. Java 17 is no longer supported.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Logstash 9.4.0 upgrades JRuby to 10 since 9.x is now EOL. JRuby 10 requires Java 21, dropping support for any version below, including 17.
For this reason, Logstash now also requires Java 21 or later and Java 17 is no longer supported.
```

As of JDK 21.0.10, all `TLS_RSA_*` cipher suites are deactivated by default due to their lack of forward secrecy. Connections relying on these suites will fail with an `SSLHandshakeException` and must be migrated to ECDHE-based cipher suites.

::::

### Plugins [logstash-plugin-9.4.0-changes]

::::{important}

> The Kafka Integration plugin `11.x` has been deprecated. The next minor Logstash release will bundle Kafka integration plugin `12.x` in its place.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Kafka Integration plugin `11.x` has been deprecated. The next minor Logstash release will bundle Kafka integration plugin `12.x` in its place, which introduces breaking changes, read more about them in the [CHANGELOG.md](https://github.com/logstash-plugins/logstash-integration-kafka/blob/v12.0.0/CHANGELOG.md#1200)
```

% ### Fixes [logstash-next-fixes]
% *

## 9.4.0 [logstash-9.4.0-release-notes]

### Features and enhancements [logstash-9.4.0-features-enhancements]

#### Reactive pipeline recovery [logstash-9.4.0-reactive-pipeline-recovery]

> This release adds a feature to recover from pipeline crashes, under the setting `pipeline.recovery`. It applies when `config.reload.automatic` is enabled and accepts:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This release adds a feature to recover from pipeline crashes, under the setting `pipeline.recovery` [#18930](https://github.com/elastic/logstash/pull/18930).
Crash recovery is applied when `config.reload.automatic` is enabled and accepts:
```
